---
title: "The power of the wicked shall be broken: The last Thursday after the Epiphany, Year 2"
date: 2026-02-19T15:19:24-06:00
draft: false
tags: [daily-office,morning-prayer,seasonal-time,lent]
categories: []
---

### The Psalter
In a little while the wicked shall be no more; 
you shall search out their place, but they will not be there.

But the lowly shall possess the land; 
they will delight in abundance of peace.

The wicked plot against the righteous 
and gnash at them with their teeth.

The Lord laughs at the wicked, 
because he sees that their day will come.

The wicked draw their sword and bend their bow
to strike down the poor and needy, 
to slaughter those who are upright in their ways.

Their sword shall go through their own heart, 
and their bow shall be broken.

The little that the righteous has 
is better than great riches of the wicked.

For the power of the wicked shall be broken, *
but the Lord upholds the righteous.

*Psalm 37:11-18*

### The Lessons
Rejoice in the Lord always; again, I will say, rejoice. Let your gentleness be known to everyone. The Lord is near. Do not be anxious about anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God. And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.

*Philippians 4:4-7*

### The Office of Readings
Initially, men are made new by the rebirth of baptism. Yet there is still required a daily renewal to repair the shortcomings of our mortal nature, and whatever degree of progress has been made, there is no one who should not be more advanced. All must therefore strive to ensure that on the day of redemption no one may be found in the sins of his former life.

The love that we owe both God and man is always free from any obstacle that would prevent us from having a good intention. [...] The person who shows love and compassion to those in any kind of affliction is blessed not only with the virtue of good will, but also with the gift of peace.

*St. Leo the Great, Bishop, d. 461*